===== PAGE 1 OF 4 =====

6
 magazine
Vola Dynamics provides 
analytics for options trad-
ing and risk management, 
as well as portfolio, PnL, 
and scenario analysis. Since 
its founding in New York in 2016, it 
has quickly established itself as the only 
third-party vendor to provide top-tier 
market-maker-quality valuations for 
vanillas and vol derivatives. Its vol fitter 
is generally acknowledged to be the best 
in the industry, and its American option 
pricer (with proper handling of cash 
dividends, etc.) is probably the fastest 
available anywhere.
Vola’s analytics library produces 
easy-to-use, tradable, real-time volatility 
curves and surfaces, that can match the 
most challenging markets in a sensible, 
arbitrage-free, and robust manner. Intui-
tive, parametric vol curves are the cru-
cial ingredient in allowing efficient signal 
research. The accurate spot-vol dynamics 
available as part of the library gives bet-
ter Greeks and more realistic scenarios, 
among other benefits.
As a battle-tested easy-to-integrate 
solution in C++11 (with wrappers for Py-
thon, Java, and C#) for any platform, it is 
available at a fraction of the cost it would 
take to build and maintain a comparable 
system in-house (if possible at all), there-
by eliminating one of the big barriers to 
entry in both the listed options market 
and derivatives markets more generally.
The founders, Timothy Klassen, Jiri 
Hoogland, and Misha Fomytskyi, have 
a combined 50+ years of experience in 
trading and modeling listed vanillas, 
as well as flow and exotic derivatives in 
all asset classes, at firms like Goldman 
Sachs, Morgan Stanley, and Getco. Timo-
thy Klassen designed the ‘new VIX’ for 
the CBOE in 2003 (when at Goldman).
The pricing and fitting 
problem
A fundamental problem that Vola Dy-
namics solves for its clients is what is 
often called the ‘volatility surface-fitting 
problem.’ It is one of the holy-grail prob-
lems of quantitative finance, especially, 
but not exclusively, in the equity mar-
kets. It is nowadays really a complex of 
multiple, interconnected problems, all of 
which contribute to the sizable barriers 
to entry that exist for derivatives markets 
these days, and arguably make the op-
tions market significantly less efficient 
and useful than it could be. 
Recall that implied volatility surfaces 
(and borrow cost curves) are the stan-
dard concepts used to summarize the 
vanilla options market in an intuitive and 
compact manner. They provide the fun-
damental building blocks for trading and 
risk-managing vanillas (listed and OTC), 
as well as the foundation for flow and 
exotic products modeling and trading.
Here is a list of the main subprob-
lems:
Cash dividend modeling [1]: Sur-
prising as this may sound, even to some 
professionals, half a century after Black–
Scholes there is no agreement on how 
to handle cash dividends, even in the 
Finally, a solution to the most vexing problems of options  
pricing and fitting.
The Swiss        Army 
Knife of Options Analytics
VOLA DYNAMICS

===== PAGE 2 OF 4 =====

 magazine	

7
VOLA DYNAMICS
context of vanilla options! Different divi-
dend models will give rise to (potentially 
very) different implied volatilities – one 
of the main reasons why every (equity) 
options trading team speaks a somewhat 
different dialect of the Black–Scholes 
language.
Borrow costs: To have proper put-
call-parity, stock and ETF options have 
to be priced with a term-dependent bor-
row cost. There is no way to get up-to-
date and useful borrow cost information 
directly, so borrow costs have to be im-
plied in real time (or at least daily, using 
intraday data) from the options market 
itself, just like implied vols.
Vol curves: None of the curves dis-
cussed in the public domain (SABR, SVI, 
SSVI, two parabolic or cubic polynomi-
als joined at-the-money (ATM), etc.) can 
actually fit vol skews of liquid underliers/
terms, like SPX, SPY, E-mini futures, 
QQQ, AAPL, AMZN, etc., in a bias-free 
manner. One of the reasons is that vol 
curve shapes these days include many 
with negative curvature around ATM. 
This started around 2005, with the now 
(in-)famous W-shaped vol curves of big 
tech names around earnings, then spread 
to US indices, and is now also present 
in most global index vol curves (KOSPI, 
NKY, HSI, etc.) for shorter maturities. 
Most recently (2019), vol curve shapes 
have become even stranger, with super-
liquid names like SPX having features 
variously described as being due to the 
‘Trump put’ and such. Such shapes are 
simply an expression of the bimodal (or 
higher-modal) expected underlier distri-
butions around future events with poten-
tially very different outcomes, of which 
in the current global environment there 
is no end in sight. The ‘funky’ shapes 
seen in equity vol curves for a while 
should therefore become a common fea-
ture also for other asset classes (and cre-
ate serious friction with simple curves/
models like SABR, the Vanna–Volga 
method, etc., that are often used there). 
Many firms have given up on the use of 
parametric curves, since they could not 
design any that match the market for 
liquid options. This approach is possible, 
but parametric curves have a number of 
significant advantages in practice.
No-arbitrage: Finding a vol surface 
(theos) without butterfly and calendar 
arbitrage that is ‘closest’ to the observed 
implied volatilities (market options 
prices) is, to repeat, one of the holy-grail 
problems for practitioners and academics 
alike. [Note that the existence of an arbi-
trage-free vol surface is equivalent to the 
existence of a local vol surface, which is 
still an important starting point for many 
problems in the pricing and hedging of 
light and heavy exotics.] Even the big 
banks struggle to produce arbitrage-free 
vol surfaces that match the market for 
their flow and structured products desk in 
an efficient, robust, and timely manner.
The speed, scale, and spread race; 
complexity; and changes in market 
structure: The last decade has seen 
important changes in listed options 
markets around the world, following the 
US lead. The penny pilot, the adoption 
of high-frequency technology, the listing 
of many more individual instruments 
(weeklies, mid-weeklies, smaller strike 
increments, options on new underliers 
like leveraged and inverse ETFs, VIX-re-
lated products), the proliferation of ex-
changes, order types, fee schedules, and 
trading protocols (e.g., auctions) have 
led to a reduction in bid-ask spreads 
for liquid instruments. At the same 
time, more recently, market-making 
requirements have largely disappeared, 
and spreads for some of the less liquid 
options have widened. The market for 
these options has become less efficient 
because market makers do not have to 
show a two-sided market anymore to 
trade – they can, for example, effectively 
internalize their options flow via auc-
tions, at least in the US. (The prevalence 
of, for example, RFQs has prevented 
many other listed markets from becom-
ing transparent and efficient in the first 
place.) Even the largest market partici-
pants have struggled to build and main-
tain the infrastructure necessary to deal 
with the increased complexity in model-
ing and engineering. All this has led to a 
dramatic increase in the barriers to entry 
for (listed) options market makers, and 
derivative desks more generally.
Another general problem facing the 
financial industry these days is the com-
petition for quantitative talent. Even the 
most famous banks and hedge funds, let 
alone smaller trading firms, have trouble 
hiring good PhDs in the face of compe-
tition from big tech. And hiring is not 
enough – the quants have to stay for the 
long term to be able to design and main-
tain the increasingly complex algorithms 
and analytics libraries used in finance to-
day (even for trading shops that can rely 
on decades of accumulated institutional 
knowledge, there are typically teams of 
15–30 people maintaining the required 
infrastructure). Related to this, budgets 
are not as lavish as they used to be in 
finance, so just being able to pay a quant 
team up to the task is increasingly diffi-
cult. Hence, it is not surprising that many 
market participants are now interested in 
outsourcing these kinds of problems.
The solution
The founders of Vola Dynamics have 
been thinking about the problems out-
lined above for almost two decades, and 
have had the good fortune to be able to 
refine solutions to these problems mul-
tiple times.
For the hardest part of the volatil-
ity surface-fitting problem, the steps 
involved are:
1. The design of a family of intuitive, 
nested volatility curves that can 
fit all the vol skew shapes seen in 
the market while making butterfly 
arbitrage (practically) impossible. 
2. The design and tuning of super-
fast and robust fitting algorithms 
for these curves.
3. As part of these algorithms, it is 
crucial to transfer information 
from liquid to less liquid options, 
to eliminate calendar and butterfly 
arbitrage, all while staying consis-
tent with the market bid-asks, if 
possible. 
4. The algorithms involved take a 
Bayesian approach (as in probabi-
listic robotics) of always updating 
‘error bars’ around each of the 
quantities being calibrated, be they 
borrow costs or volatility surface 
parameters. This is important for 
robustness.
5. Crucially, the algorithms involved 
at all stages have a notion of what 
makes financial sense, whether it 
be put-call-parity, no-arbitrage, or 
spot-vol dynamics. The notion of 
error bars allows the algorithms to 
find the proper compromise, when 
needed, between enforcing these 
constraints versus matching the 
market data as literally as possible.
As alluded to above, another impor-
tant building block that permeates the 
Vola Dynamics library is a simple and 
accurate spot-vol dynamics – that is, a 
simple parametrization of how a vol sur-
face moves when the underlier moves. In 
most cases, it requires just one number 
(the ‘vol sensitivity’, a.k.a. Bergomi’s 
‘SSR’) to realistically describe the behav-
ior of the full parametric vol surface for 
any underlier move.
The highlights of the current offer-
ing of the Vola Dynamics library can be 
summarized as:
• Super-fast, robust, bias- and arbi-
trage-free calibration of parametric 
volatility surfaces for all vanilla 
options under any market condi-
tions, thereby providing top-tier

===== PAGE 3 OF 4 =====

8 
magazine
VOLA DYNAMICS
market-maker-quality valuation 
and Greeks. Even on the level of 
fitting one snapshot of the market 
are the fits extremely stable (e.g., 
no ‘floppy wings’). Th ere is also a 
‘temporal filtering’ mode to use 
information from past fits (without 
introducing a lag).
•  Super-fast, consistent pricing, and 
hedging of volatility derivatives 
with vanillas under the same spot-
vol dynamics assumptions.
•  A simple, universal, and empiri-
cally accurate implementation of 
spot-vol dynamics. Th is leads to 
extra benefi ts, including:
•  Smart Greeks like ‘skew delta’ 
and ‘skew gamma’ (a big deal 
these days – for example, for 
SPX calls, as will be discussed 
elsewhere).
•  Easy and realistic scenario gen-
eration for vanillas and volatil-
ity derivatives.
•  Well-designed APIs (in C++11, 
Python, and Java; soon also C#) 
to allow easy integration into any 
valuation and risk infrastructure.
Th e library’s functionality is con-
stantly growing. Th e latest addition, for 
example, is a ‘VIX module’ that provides, 
among other features, an analytic beta of 
VIX futures prices with respect to SPX 
moves.
Th ere are many concrete examples 
at VolaDynamics.com of how the Vola 
fitter produces sensible volatility surfaces 
in diffi  cult situations. Here, we just show 
two examples – one involving SPX, the 
other AMZN. 
Let’s start with SPX on 2019-08-26, 
a market up-day (Monday), aft er the 
big down-day of 2019-08-23 (Friday). A 
typical fit is shown in Figure 1. 
Th ere are days with even ‘funkier’ 
Figure 1: Volatility curve fit for the first monthly expiry on the 15:30:00 ET 
snapshot of 2019-08-26, plotted in normalized strike (NS) space, with the 
recommended curve type. The input market-implied vols are shown in green
Figure 2: As in Figure 1, but fitting the same input data to the SSVI/S3 curve
Figure 3: The implied ‘total variances’ (w) of the fit in Figure 1, as a function of 
log-strike-over-forward (LKF), for all SPX terms on this snapshot

===== PAGE 4 OF 4 =====

magazine 
 
9
VOLA DYNAMICS
curves for SPX (e.g., 2019-08-23), but 
note that even here the first monthly 
expiry has negative curvature around 
ATM, and quite a steep (positive cur-
vature) ‘knee’ around NS = 1 in the call 
wing. Just how strange these shapes are, 
perhaps only becomes clear when we fit 
the data with simpler curves. In Figure 
2, for example, we show the fit with the 
well-known SSVI (a.k.a. S3) curve, a 
three-parameter curve. 
Even though we’re trying to fit only a 
much smaller range with the S3 curve – 
about NS = –2.5 to +2.3, rather than –10 
to +2.4 (meaning all data) — the quality 
of the fit is of the order of 100× worse, 
by standard statistical metrics, e.g., the 
reduced chi-square. SABR, another 
three-parameter curve, is even worse, 
and SVI (a.k.a. ‘S5’), a five-parameter 
curve, is only slightly better (in the call 
wing). All of these curves suff er from the 
fundamental problem that they do not 
allow one to match, even in principle, 
the qualitative shapes oft en seen in the 
market these days, like negative ATM 
curvature. In practice, this is the diff er-
ence between a tradeable fitted curve 
and a useless one.
To conclude this example, Figure 3 
shows the so-called total variance plot, 
useful, for example, to assess the pres-
ence or absence of calendar arbitrage. 
Th e lines for the almost 40 terms do 
not intersect, showing that there is no 
calendar arbitrage in the fits (although 
not proven by this plot, there is also no 
butterfl y arbitrage). Th is is quite diffi  cult 
to achieve, as any practitioner who has 
worked on these problems knows.
In Figure 4, we show some volatil-
ity curves for Amazon (AMZN) shortly 
before the earnings announcement aft er 
the close on 2018-04-26. 
Th e massively negative curvature in 
the first term is close to, but does not 
cross, the lower bound on the curvature 
coming from the no-ATM-butterfl y-
arbitrage condition (see section 3 in [2]
for details on this bound). Again, it is 
not trivial to produce an arbitrage-free 
volatility surface that matches the market 
extremely well in a situation such as this.
Conclusion
Virtually all market participants need 
some combination of speed, scale, ac-
curacy, and robustness in their options 
valuations, but had nowhere to turn for 
a solution. Every serious market partici-
pant had to develop their own in-house 
solution, with the encompassing op-
portunity cost, large actual upfront and 
maintenance costs, as well as a signifi -
cant risk of outright failure. Numerous 
vendors have previously tried to solve 
this problem. Th e Vola analytics library 
finally provides all the basic building 
blocks that serious options and deriva-
tives market participants – whether new 
or established – need to build and grow 
their business.  
More information is available at 
VolaDynamics.com.
Figure 4: Volatility curves for the first ten expiries of AMZN on the 
2018-04-26, 15:45:00 ET snapshot, just before earnings are released, as a 
function of normalized strike (NS)
REFERENCES
[1] Klassen, T.R. 2015. Pricing vanilla op-
tions with cash dividends. Vola Dynamics 
White Paper.
[2] Klassen, T.R. 2016. Necessary and suf-
ficient no-arbitrage conditions for the 
SSVI/S3 volatility curve. Vola Dynamics 
White Paper.
Serving a wide variety of market participants
Vola Dynamics’ clients include a large variety of firms, both small and large, 
from sophisticated prop shops, market makers, and banks to the biggest 
hedge funds. They trade equity, futures, and index options across all geogra-
phies, as well as vol derivatives. (And some clients are not trading firms, but 
entities that have to value a large universe of options reliably and accurately 
every day.) Clients have traded off  Vola valuations, even during challenging 
market conditions around Brexit, the US and French elections, and the Febru-
ary 2018 ‘Volmageddon’.
The response to the Vola library has been enthusiastic, from day one, as 
expressed in some client quotes:
“Your vol curves work like magic.”
“Impressive library, vastly superior to any other vendor product.”
 
“Modern options market making is incredibly competitive. Automated 
volatility curves are critical and Vola provides the most reliable and flexible curves 
in the business. Vola support is also top-notch; you have access to a level of quant 
knowledge that would be hard to hire.” 
 “We’ve reviewed a few vendors and none came close to the performance and 
fitting quality we’ve seen with your library. In some instances [of other ven-
dors], there were serious gaps between what was advertised and what we’ve 
seen, in terms of readiness and fitting quality.”
